#summary cs473 syllabus for Data Mining (WVU, Fall 2009)
#labels teaching,timm

||<wiki:toc max_depth="4" />||http://www.lcsee.cemr.wvu.edu/cemrimages/wvulogotag1.gif <p>[http://www.lcsee.wvu.edu Lane Department of Com. Sci. and Elec. Eng.] ||

The official version of this syllabus is TBD.

----

= Syllabus =

 * Course name: cs473 Data Mining
 * Effective data of syllabus: Aug 15, 2009
 * Site: LCSEE, WVU
 * Course number: 87638 cs473
 * Course format: 3 credit hours 3 hr lectures, assesssment by project+exams (cs473)
 * Textbook (optional):
   * [http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0133708756  ANSI Common LISP] : Paul Graham
 * Schedule : Tuesday/Thursday 	1700-1815 
 * Location : ESB 207
 * Instructor name: Tim Menzies Ph.D. ESB 841a, tim@menzies.us. Note: use the above email for private messages. For most of the class traffic, use the class discussion list (http://groups.google.com/group/csx73) and its email csx73@googlegroups.com.
 * Consultation times : Tuesday/Thursday 4:00 to 5:00pm, 841a or by appointment 

= Objectives =

Upon successful completion of this course, students should have:

 * Ability to program elementary data mining methods.
 * Ability to program data mining evaluation experiments.
 * Ability to convert domain data into valid inputs for a learner;
 * Ability to describe the differences between widely-used data miners;
 * Ability to describe the practical issues associated with data mining for real-world applications;
 * Students will have gained experience in working within a team of their peers.

= Links =
 * http://www.arc.wvu.edu/courses/ : WVU course pages
 * http://www.arc.wvu.edu/examschedule_fall.html : exam schedule page
 * csx73@googlegroups.com : class email list

All students are required to join the GOOGLE news group [ http://groups.google.com/group/agent-oriented agent-oriented].
Official annountements will be posted to the thread [http://groups.google.com/group/agent-oriented/browse_thread/thread/d53c8ea98b2de9c8# admin]. Students are require to read these thread on a regular basis.

 

= Expected Workload =

You MUST be prepared to dedicate AT LEAST 5-8 working hours a week
to this class (excluding the time spent in the classroom). A minimal
prerequisite for the successful completion is good understanding
of programming concepts. You will be given class accounts on CS
Department machines and all assignments will have to be submitted
and run there. Please note that a Linux server can be accessed from
any PC using a secure connection service, such as SSH (explanation
to be provided in class).  


= Assessment =

Note that all reports will be submitted using subversion to the [http://code.google.com/p/ourmine/   ourmine] website and written in  [http://code.google.com/p/support/wiki/WikiSyntax Wiki/Markdown] syntax.

 * Monday week 4 : Assignnment #1: Intro exercises 10%
 * Monday week 7 : Assignment #2: intermediary data mining techniques, 10%
 * Thursday week 7 : Mid term 15%
 * Monday week 10 : Assignment #3: Experimental methods in data mining 10%
 * Friday week 10 : Literature reviews, 10%
 * Last week of class : presentation on your project, 10%
 * One week later : final report 15%
 * End-of-term exam : 15%

Note that students must complete one other 5% tasks, at any time, during the term. But this tasks must be completed by 
the middle of Novemeber:

 * Task 1: data mining studies, 5%

See also, below, for how to lose marks due to poor attendance.

For special consideration on the above, either:

    * See me at start of semester advising planned absences or
    * provide a doctor's certificate indicating that the student was unable to work on their studies for a relevant period (that note need NOT name the illness, but should list its duration)

= Attendance policy =

Students are expected to regularly attend all lectures. After three noted absences, students will lose two points per absence. After three noted lated arrivals, students will lose one point per late arrival. If you have another commitment that requires you to be consistently late, you should drop the class.

= Social Justice Statement =

West Virginia University is committted to social justice. I concur with that commitment and expect to foster a nurturing learning environment based upon open communication, mutual respect, and non-discrimination. Our University does not discriminate on the basis of race, sex, age, disability, veteran status, religion, sexual orientation, color or national origin. Any suggestions as to how to further such a positive and open environment in this class will be appreciated and given serious consideration.

If you are a person with a disability and anticipate needing any type of accommodation in order to participate in this class, please advise me and make appropriate arrangements with Disability Services (293-6700).

= Statement of Academic Integrity =

The integrity of the classes offered by any academic institution solidifies the foundation of its mission and cannot be sacrificed to expediency, ignorance, or blatant fraud. Therefore, I will enforce rigorous standards of academic integrity in all aspects and assignments of this course.

For the detailed policy of West Virginia University regarding the definitions of acts considered to fall under academic dishonesty and possible ensuing sanctions, please see the Student Conduct Code at http://www.arc.wvu.edu/admissions/integrity.html. Should you have any questions about possibly improper research citations or references, or any other activity that may be interpreted as an attempt at academic dishonesty, please see me before the assignment is due to discuss the matter